On the day King George V was crowned at Westminster Abbey in London,
Bil y Wil iams went down the pit in Aberowen, South Wales.
The twenty-second of June, 1911, was Bil y's thirteenth birthday. He was
woken by his father. Da's technique for waking people was more effective
than
it was kind. He patted Bil y's cheek, in a regular rhythm, firmly and
insistently. Bil y was in a deep sleep, and for a second he tried to ignore it,
but the
patting went on relentlessly. Momentarily he felt angry; but then he
remembered that he had to get up, he even wanted to get up, and he opened
his eyes
and sat upright with a jerk.
"Four o'clock," Da said, then he left the room, his boots banging on the
wooden staircase as he went down.
Today Bil y would begin his working life by becoming an apprentice col
ier, as most of the men in town had done at his age. He wished he felt more
like
a miner. But he was determined not to make a fool of himself. David
Crampton had cried on his first day down the pit, and they stil cal ed him
Dai
Crybaby, even though he was twenty-five and the star of the town's rugby
team.
It was the day after midsummer, and a bright early light came through the
smal window. Bil y looked at his grandfather, lying beside him. Gramper's
eyes were open. He was always awake, whenever Bil y got up; he said old
people did not sleep much.
Bil y got out of bed. He was wearing only his underdrawers. In cold
weather he wore his shirt to bed, but Britain was enjoying a hot summer,
and the
nights were mild. He pul ed the pot from under the bed and took off the lid.
There was no change in the size of his penis, which he cal ed his peter. It
was stil the childish stub it had always been. He had hoped it might have
started to grow on the night before his birthday, or perhaps that he might see
just one black hair sprouting somewhere near it, but he was disappointed.
His best friend, Tommy Griffiths, who had been born on the same day, was
different: he had a cracked voice and a dark fuzz on his upper lip, and his
peter
was like a man's. It was humiliating.
As Bil y was using the pot, he looked out of the window. Al he could see
was the slag heap, a slate-gray mountain of tailings, waste from the coal
mine,
mostly shale and sandstone. This was how the world appeared on the
second day of Creation, Bil y thought, before God said: "Let the earth bring
forth
grass." A gentle breeze wafted fine black dust off the slag onto the rows of
houses.
Inside the room there was even less to look at. This was the back bedroom,
a narrow space just big enough for the single bed, a chest of drawers, and
Gramper's old trunk. On the wal was an embroidered sampler that read:
BELIEVE ON THE
LORD JESUS CHRIST
AND THOU SHALT
BE SAVED
There was no mirror.
One door led to the top of the stairs, the other to the front bedroom, which
could be accessed only through this one. It was larger and had space for two
beds. Da and Mam slept there, and Bil y's sisters had too, years ago. The
eldest, Ethel, had now left home, and the other three had died, one from
measles, one from whooping cough, and one from diphtheria. There had
been an older brother, too, who had shared Bil y's bed before Gramper
came.
Wesley had been his name, and he had been kil ed underground by a
runaway dram, one of the wheeled tubs that carried coal.
Bil y pul ed on his shirt. It was the one he had worn to school yesterday.
Today was Thursday, and he changed his shirt only on Sunday. However, he
did
have a new pair of trousers, his first long ones, made of the thick waterrepel
ent cotton cal ed moleskin. They were the symbol of entry into the
world of
men, and he pul ed them on proudly, enjoying the heavy masculine feel of
the fabric. He put on a thick leather belt and the boots he had inherited from
Wesley, then he went downstairs.
Most of the ground floor was taken up by the living room, fifteen feet
square, with a table in the middle and a fireplace to one side, and a
homemade rug
on the stone floor. Da was sitting at the table reading an old copy of the
Daily Mail, a pair of spectacles perched on the bridge of his long, sharp
nose .
Mam was making tea. She put down the steaming kettle, kissed Bil y's
forehead, and said: "How's my little man on his birthday?"
Bil y did not reply. The "little" was wounding, because he was little, and the
"man" was just as hurtful because he was not a man. He went into the
scul ery at the back of the house. He dipped a tin bowl into the water barrel,
washed his face and hands, and poured the water away in the shal ow stone
sink. The scul ery had a copper with a fire grate underneath, but it was used
only on bath night, which was Saturday.
They had been promised running water soon, and some of the miners'
houses already had it. It seemed a miracle to Bil y that people could get a
cup of
cold clear water just by turning the tap, and not have to carry a bucket to the
standpipe out in the street. But indoor water had not yet come to Wel ington
Row, where the Wil iamses lived.
He returned to the living room and sat at the table. Mam put a big cup of
milky tea in front of him, already sugared. She cut two thick slices off a loaf
of
homemade bread and got a slab of dripping from the pantry under the stairs.
Bil y put his hands together, closed his eyes, and said: "Thank you Lord for
this food amen." Then he drank some tea and spread dripping on his bread.
Da's pale blue eyes looked over the top of the paper. "Put salt on your
bread," he said. "You'l sweat underground."
Bil y's father was a miners' agent, employed by the South Wales Miners'
Federation, which was the strongest trade union in Britain, as he said
whenever he got the chance. He was known as Dai Union. A lot of men
were cal ed Dai, pronounced "die," short for David, or Dafydd in Welsh. Bil
y had
learned in school that David was popular in Wales because it was the name
of the country's patron saint, like Patrick in Ireland. Al the Dais were
distinguished one from another not by their surnames--almost everyone in
town was Jones, Wil iams, Evans, or Morgan--but by a nickname. Real
names
were rarely used when there was a humorous alternative. Bil y was Wil iam
Wil iams, so they cal ed him Bil y Twice. Women were sometimes given
their
husband's nickname, so that Mam was Mrs. Dai Union.
Gramper came down while Bil y was eating his second slice. Despite the
warm weather he wore a jacket and waistcoat. When he had washed his
hands he sat opposite Bil y. "Don't look so nervous," he said. "I went down
the pit when I was ten. And my father was carried to the pit on his father's
back
at the age of five, and worked from six in the morning until seven in the
evening. He never saw daylight from October to March."
"I'm not nervous," Bil y said. This was untrue. He was scared stiff.
However, Gramper was kindly, and he did not press the point. Bil y liked
Gramper. Mam treated Bil y like a baby, and Da was stern and sarcastic, but
Gramper was tolerant and talked to Bil y as to an adult.
"Listen to this," said Da. He would never buy the Mail, a right-wing rag, but
he sometimes brought home someone else's copy and read the paper
aloud in a scornful voice, mocking the stupidity and dishonesty of the ruling
class. "'Lady Diana Manners has been criticized for wearing the same dress
to two different bal s. The younger daughter of the Duke of Rutland won
"best lady's costume" at the Savoy Bal for her off-the-shoulder boned
bodice with
ful hooped skirt, receiving a prize of two hundred and fifty guineas.'" He
lowered the paper and said: "That's at least five years' wages for you, Bil y
boy."
He resumed: "'But she drew the frowns of the cognoscenti by wearing the
same dress to Lord Winterton and F. E. Smith's party at Claridge's Hotel.
One
can have too much of a good thing, people said.'" He looked up from the
paper. "You'd better change that frock, Mam," he said. "You don't want to
draw
the frowns of the cognoscenti."
Mam was not amused. She was wearing an old brown wool dress with
patched elbows and stains under the armpits. "If I had two hundred and fifty
guineas I'd look better than Lady Diana Muck," she said, not without
bitterness.
"It's true," Gramper said. "Cara was always the pretty one--just like her
mother." Mam's name was Cara. Gramper turned to Bil y. "Your
grandmother
was Italian. Her name was Maria Ferrone." Bil y knew this, but Gramper
liked to retel familiar stories. "That's where your mother gets her glossy
black hair
and lovely dark eyes--and your sister. Your gran was the most beautiful girl
in Cardiff--and I got her!" Suddenly he looked sad. "Those were the days,"
he
said quietly.
Da frowned with disapproval--such talk suggested the lusts of the flesh--but
Mam was cheered by her father's compliments, and she smiled as she put
his breakfast in front of him. "Oh, aye," she said. "Me and my sisters were
considered beauties. We'd show those dukes what a pretty girl is, if we had
the
money for silk and lace."
Bil y was surprised. He had never thought of his mother as beautiful or
otherwise, though when she dressed for the chapel social on Saturday
evening
she did look striking, especial y in a hat. He supposed she might once have
been a pretty girl, but it was hard to imagine.
"Mind you," said Gramper, "your gran's family were clever, too. My
brother-in-law was a miner, but he got out of the industry and opened a cafe
in Tenby.
Now there's a life for you--sea breezes, and nothing to do al day but make
coffee and count your money."
Da read another item. "'As part of the preparations for the coronation,
Buckingham Palace has produced a book of instructions two hundred and
twelve
pages long.'" He looked over the paper. "Mention that down the pit today,
Bil y. The men wil be relieved to know that nothing has been left to
chance."
Bil y was not very interested in royalty. What he liked was the adventure
stories the Mail often printed about tough rugby-playing public-school men
catching sneaky German spies. According to the paper, such spies infested
every town in Britain, although there did not seem to be any in Aberowen,
disappointingly.
Bil y stood up. "Going down the street," he announced. He left the house by
the front door. "Going down the street" was a family euphemism: it meant
going to the toilets, which stood halfway down Wel ington Row. A low
brick hut with a corrugated iron roof was built over a deep hole in the earth.
The hut
was divided into two compartments, one for men and one for women. Each
compartment had a double seat, so that people went to the toilet two by two.
No one knew why the builders had chosen this arrangement, but everyone
made the best of it. Men looked straight ahead and said nothing, but--as Bil
y
could often hear--women chatted companionably. The smel was
suffocating, even when you experienced it every day of your life. Bil y
always tried to
breathe as little as possible while he was inside, and came out gasping for
air. The hole was shoveled out periodical y by a man cal ed Dai Muck.
When Bil y returned to the house he was delighted to see his sister Ethel
sitting at the table. "Happy birthday, Bil y!" she cried. "I had to come and
give
you a kiss before you go down the pit."
Ethel was eighteen, and Bil y had no trouble seeing her as beautiful. Her
mahogany-colored hair was irrepressibly curly, and her dark eyes twinkled
with
mischief. Perhaps Mam had looked like this once. Ethel wore the plain
black dress and white cotton cap of a housemaid, an outfit that flattered her.
Bil y worshipped Ethel. As wel as pretty, she was funny and clever and
brave, sometimes even standing up to Da. She told Bil y things no one else
would explain, such as the monthly episode women cal ed the curse, and
what was the crime of public indecency that had caused the Anglican vicar
to
leave town in such a hurry. She had been top of the class al the way through
school, and her essay "My Town or Vil age" had taken first prize in a
contest
run by the South Wales Echo. She had won a copy of Cassells Atlas of the
World.
She kissed Bil y's cheek. "I told Mrs. Jevons the housekeeper that we were
running out of boot polish and I'd better get some more from the town."
Ethel
lived and worked at Ty Gwyn, the vast home of Earl Fitzherbert, a mile
away up the mountain. She handed Bil y something wrapped in a clean rag.
"I stole
a piece of cake for you."
"Oh, thanks, Eth!" said Bil y. He loved cake.
Mam said: "Shal I put it in your snap?"
"Aye, please."
Mam got a tin box from the cupboard and put the cake inside. She cut two
more slabs of bread, spread them with dripping, sprinkled salt, and put them
in the tin. Al the miners had a tin "snap." If they took food underground
wrapped in a rag, the mice would eat it before the midmorning break. Mam
said:
"When you bring me home your wages, you can have a slice of boiled
bacon in your snap."
Bil y's
